******************
8. Boolean Algebra
******************

As a first stepping stone toward a deeper exploration of deductive
logic, we explore the related notion of Boolean *algebra*. Boolean
algebra is a mathematical framework for representing and reasoning
about truth.

This algebra is akin to ordinary high school algebra, and as such,
deals with values, operators, and the syntax and the evaluation of
expressions involving values and operators.  However, the values in
Boolean algebra are limited to the two values in the set, :math:`bool
= \{ 0, 1\}`. They are often written instead as *false* and *true*,
respectively. And rather than arithmetic operators such as numeric
negation, addition, and subtraction, Boolean algebra defines a set of
*Boolean operators*. They are typically given names such as *and*,
*or*, and *not*, and they both operate on and yield Boolean values.

In this chapter, we first discuss Boolean algebra in programming, a
setting with which the reader is already familar, baesd on a first
course in programming. We then take a deeper look at the syntax and
semantics of *expressions* in Boolean algebra. We do this by seeing
how to use *inductive definitions* and *recursive functions* in the
Dafny language to implement an *inductive data type* for representing
Boolean expressions and a recursive *evaluation* function that when
given any Boolean expression tells whether it is *true* or *false*.

Boolean Algebra in Dafny
========================

All general-purpose programming languages support Boolean
algebra. Dafny does so through its *bool* data type and the
*operators* associated with it. Having taking a programming course,
you will already have been exposed to all of the important ideas.
In Dafny, as in many languages, the Boolean values are called
*true* and *false* (rather than *1* and *0*).

The Boolean operators are also denoted not by words, such as *or* and
*not* but by math-like operators. For example, *!* is the not operator
and *||* is the *or* operator.


Here's a (useless) Dafny method that illustrates how Boolean values
and operators can be used in Dafny. It presents a method, *BoolOps*,
that takes a Boolean value and returns one. The commands within the
method body illustrate the use of Boolean constant (literal) values
and the unary and binary operators provided by the Dafny language.

.. code-block:: dafny

   method BoolOps(a: bool) returns (r: bool)  
   {
       var t: bool := true;    // explicit type declaration
       var f := false;         // type inferred automatically
       var not := !t;          // negation
       var conj := t && f;     // conjunction, short-circuit evaluation
       var disj := t || f;     // disjunction, short-circuit (sc) evaluation
       var impl := t ==> f;    // implication, right associative, sc from left
       var foll := t <== f;    // follows, left associative, sc from right
       var equv := t <==> t;   // iff, bi-implication
       return true;            // returning a Boolean value
    }


The first line assigns the Boolean constant, *true*, to a Boolean
variable, *t*, that is explicitly declared to be of type,, *bool*.
The second line assigns the Boolean constant, *false*, to *f*, and
allows Dafny to infer that the type of *f* must be *bool*, based on
the type of value being assigned to it. The third line illustrates the
use of the *negation* operator, denoted as *!* in Dafny. Here the
negation of *t* is assigned to the new Boolean variable, *not*. The
next line illustrates the use of the Boolean *and*, or *conjunction*
operator (*&&*). Next is the Boolean *or*, or *disjunction*, operator,
(*||*). These should all be familiar.

Implication (*==>*) is a binary operator (taking two Boolean values)
that is read as *implies* and that evaluates to false only when the
first argument is true and the second one is false, and that evaluates
to true otherwise. The *follows* operator (*<==*) swaps the order of
the arguments, and evaluates to false if the first argument is false
and the second is true, and evaluates to true otherwise. Finally, the
*equivalence* operator evaluates to true if both arguments have the
same Boolean value, and evaluates to false otherwise. These operators
are especially useful in writing assertions in Dafny.

The last line returns the Boolean value true as the result of running
this method. Other operations built into Dafny also return Boolean
values.  Arithmetic comparison operators, such as *<*, are examples.
The less than operator, for example, takes two numerical arguments and
returns true if the first is strictly less than the second, otherwise
it returns false.

Boolean Values
==============

Boolean algebra is an algebra, which is a set of values and of
operations that take and return these values. The set of values in
Boolean algebra, is just the set containing *0* and *1*.

.. math::

   bool = \{ 0, 1 \}.

In English that expression just gave a name that we can use, *bool*,
to the set containing the values, *0* and *1*. Although these values
are written as if they were small natural numbers, you must think of
them as elements of a different type. They aren't natural numbers but
simply the two values in this other, Boolean, algebra. We could use
different symbols to represent these values. In fact, they are often
written instead as *false* (for *0*) and *true* (for *1*).The exact
symbols we use to represent these values don't really matter. What
really makes Boolean algebra what it is are the *operators* defined
by Boolean algebra and how they behave.

Boolean Operators
=================

An algebra, again, is a set of values of a particular kind and a set
of operators involving that kind of value. Having introduced the set
of two values of the Boolean type, let's turn to the *operations* of
Boolean algebra.


Nullary, Unary, Binary, and n-Ary Operators
-------------------------------------------

The operations of an algebra take zero or more values and return (or
reduce to) values of the same kind. Boolean operators, for example,
take zero or more Boolean values and reduce to Boolean values. An
operator that takes no values (and nevertheless returns a value, as
all operators do) is called a *constant*. Each value in the value set
of an algebra can be though of as an operator that takes no values.

Such an operator is also called *nullary*. An operator that takes one
value is called *unary*; one that takes two, *binary*, and in general,
one that takes *n* arguments is called *n-ary* (pronounced "EN-airy").

Having already introduced the constant (*nullary*) values of Boolean
algebra, each of the type we have called *bool*, we now introduce the
types and behaviors the unary and binary Boolean operators, including
each of those supported in Dafny.

The Unary Operators of Boolean Algebra
--------------------------------------

While there are two constants in Boolean algebra, each of type *bool*,
there are four unary operators, each of type :math:`bool \rightarrow
bool`. This type, which contains an arrow, is a *function* type. It is
the type of any function that first takes an argument of type *bool*
then reduces to a value of type *bool*. It's easier to read, write,
and say in math than in English. In math, the type would be prounced
as "bool to bool."

There is more than one value of this function type. For example one
such function takes any *bool* argument and always returns the other
one. This function is of type "bool to bool", but it is not the same
as the function that takes any bool argument and always returns the
same value that it got. The type of each function is :math:`bool
\rightarrow bool`, but the function *values* are different.

In the programming field, the type of a function is given when it
name, its arguments, and return values are declared. This part of a
function definition is sometimes called the function *signature*, but
it's just as well to think of it as decaring the function *type*.  The
*body* of the function, usually a sequence of commands enclosed in
curly braces, describes its actual behavior, the particular function
value associated with the given function name and type.

We know that there is more than one unary Boolean function. So how
many are there? To specify the behavior of an operator completely, we
have to define what result it returns for each possible combination of
its argument values. A unary operator takes only one argument (of the
given type). In Boolean algebra, a unary function can thus take one of
only two possible values; and it can return only one of two possible
result values. The answer to the question is just the number of ways
that a function can *map* two argument values to two result values.

And the answer to this question is *four*. A function can map both *0*
and *1* to *0*; both *0* and *1* to *1*; *0* to *0* and *1* to *1*;
and *0* to *1* and *1* to *0*. There are no other possibilities. An
easy-to-understand way to graphically represent the behavior of each
of these operations is with a *truth table*.

The rows of a truth table depict all possible combinations of argument
values in the columns to the left, and in the last column on the right
a truth tables presents the corresponding resulting value.  The column
headers give names to the argument values and results column headers
present expressions using mathematical logic notations that represent
how the resulting values are computed.

Constant False
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Here then is a truth table for what we will call the *constant_false*
operator, which takes a Boolean argument, either *true* or *false*,
and always returns *false.* In our truth tables, we use the symbols,
*true* and *false*, instead of *1* and *0*, for consistency with the
symbols that most programming languages, including Dafny, use for the
Boolean constants. 

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_false.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6

Constant True
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *constant_true* operator always returns *true*.

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_true.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6
	    
Identity Function(s)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Boolean *identity* function takes one Boolean value as an argument
and returns that value, whichever it was. 

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_id.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6

As an aside we will note that *identity functions* taking any type of
value are functions that always return exactly the value they took as
an argument. What we want to say is that "for any type, *T*, and any
value, *t* of that type, the identity function for type *T* applied to
*t* always returns *t* itself. In mathematical logical notation,
:math:`\forall T: Type, \forall t: T, id_T(t) = t.` It's clearer in
mathematical language than in English! Make sure that both make sense
to you now. That is the end of our aside. Now back to Boolean algebra.

Negation
^^^^^^^^

The Boolean negation, or *not*, operator, is the last of the four
unary operators on Boolean values. It returns the value that it was
*not* given as an argument. If given *true*, it evaluates to *false*,
and if given *false*, to *true.*

The truth table makes this behavior clear.  It also introduces the
standard notation in mathematical logic for the negation operator,
:math:`\neg P`. This expression is pronounced, *not P*. It evaluates
to *true* if *P* is false, and to *false* if *P* is *true*.

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_not.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6

Binary Boolean Operators
------------------------

Now let's consider the binary operators of Boolean algebra. Each takes
two Boolean arguments and returns a Boolean value as a result. The
type of each such function is written :math:`bool \rightarrow bool
\rightarrow bool`, pronounced "bool to bool to bool." A truth table
for a binary Boolean operator will have two columns for arguments, and
one on the right for the result of applying the operator being defined
to the argument values in the left two columns.

Because binary Boolean operators take two arguments, each with two
possible values, there is a total of four possible combinations of
argument values: *true* and *true*, *true* and *false*, *false* and
*true*, and *false* and *false*. A truth table for a binary operator
will thus have four rows.

The rightmost column of a truth table for an operator is really where
the action is. It defines what result is returned for each combination
of argument values. In a table with four rows, there will be four
cells to fill in the final column. In a Boolean algebra there are two
ways to fill each cell. And there are exactly *12^4 = 6* ways to do
that. We can write them as *0000, 0001, 0010, 0011, 0100, 0101, 0110,
0111, 1000, 1001, 1010, 1011, 1100, 1101, 1110, 1111*. There are thus
exactly *16* total binary operators in Boolean algebra.

Mathematicians have given names to all *16*, but in practice we tend
to use just a few of them. They are called *and*, *or*, and *not*. The
rest can be expressed as combinations these operators.  It is common
in computer science also to use binary operations called *nand* (for
*not and*), *xor* (for *exclusive or*) and *implies*.  Here we present
truth tables for each of the binary Boolean operators in Dafny.


And (conjunction)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *and* operator in Boolean algebra takes two Boolean arguments and
returns *true* when both arguments are *true*, and otherwise, *false*.

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_and.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

Nand (not and)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *nand* operator, short for *not and*, returns the opposite value
from the *and* operator: *false* if both arguments are *true* and
*true* otherwise. 

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_nand.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

As an aside, the *nand* operator is especially important for designers
of digital logic circuits. The reason is that *every* binary Boolean
operator can be simulated by composing *nand* operations in certain
patterns. So if we have a billion tiny *nand* circuits (each with two
electrical inputs and an output that is off only when both inputs are
on), then all we have to do is connect all these little ciruits up in
the right patterns to implement very complex Boolean functions. The
capability to etch billions of tiny *nand* circuits in silicon and to
connect them in complex ways is the heart of the computer revolution.
Now back to Boolean algebra.


Or (disjunction)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *or*, or *disjunction*, operator evaluates to *false* only if both
arguments are *false*, and otherwise to *true*.

It's important to note that it evaluates to *true* if either one or
both of its arguments are true. When a dad says to his child, "You can
have a candy bar *or* a donut, *he likely doesn't mean *or* in the
sense of *disjunction*.  Otherwise the child well educated in logic
would surely say, "Thank you, Dad, I'll greatly enjoy having both."

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_or.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

Xor (exclusive or)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

What the dad most likely meant by *or* is what in Boolean algebra we
call *exclusive or*, written as *xor*.  It evalutes to true if either
one, but *not both*, of its arguments is true, and to false otherwise.

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_xor.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

Nor (not or)
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *nor* operator returns the negation of what the *or* operator
applied to the same arguments returns: *xor(b1,b2) = not(or(b1, b2))*.
As an aside, like *nand*, the *nor* operator is *universal*, in the
sense that it can be composed to with itself in different patterns to
simulate the effects of any other binary Boolean operator.

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_nor.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

Implies
^^^^^^^

The *implies* operator is used to express the idea that if one
condition, a premise, is true, another one, the conclusion, must be.
So this operator returns true when both arguments are true. If the
first argument is false, this operator returns true. It returns false
only in the case where the first argument is true and the second is
not, because that violates the idea that if the first is true then the
second must be. 


.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_implies.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

Follows
^^^^^^^

The *follows* operator reverses the sense of an implication. Rather
than being understood to say that truth of the first argument should
*lead to* the truth of the second, it says that the truth of the first
should *follow from* the truth of the second.

.. csv-table::
   :file: bool_follows.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 6, 6, 6

There are other binary Boolean operators. They even have names, though
one rarely sees these names used in practice.

A Ternary Binary Operator
-------------------------

We can of course define Boolean operators of any arity. As just one
example, we introduce a *ternary* (3-ary) Boolean operator. It takes
three Boolean values as arguments and returns a Boolean result. It's
type is thus ::`bool \rightarrow bool \rightarrow bool \rightarrow
bool`. We will call it *ifThenElse_{bool}*.

The way this operator works is that the value of the first argument
determines which of the next two arguments values the function will
return. If the first argument is *true* then the value of the whole
expression is the value of the second argument, otherwise it is the
value of the third. So, for example, *ifThenElse_{bool}(true, true,
false)* evaluates to true, while *ifThenElse_{bool}(false, true,
false)* is false.

It is sometimes helpful to write Boolean expressions involving *n-ary*
operators for *n>1* using something other than function application
(prefix) notation. So, rather than *and(true,false)*, with the
operator in front of the arguments (*prefix* notation), we would
typically write *true && false* to mean the same thing. We have first
sed a symbol, *&&*, instead of the English word, *and* to name the
operator of interest. We have also put the function name (now *&&*)
*between* the arguments rather than in front of them. This is called
*infix* notation.

With ternary and other operators, it can even make sense to break up
the name of the operator and spread its parts across the whole
expression. For example, instead of writing, *ifThenElse_{bool}(true,
true, false)*, we could write it as *IF true THEN true ELSE false.*
Here, the capitalized words all together represent the name of the
function applied to the three Boolean arguments in the expression.

As an aside, when we use infix notation, we have to do some extra
work, namely to specify the *order of operations*, so that when we
write expressions, the meaning is unambiguous. We have to say which
operators have higher and lower *precedence*, and whether operators
are *left*, *right*, or not associative. In everyday arithmetic, for
example, multiplication has higher precedence than addition, so the
expression *3 + 4 * 5* is read as *3 + (4 * 5)* even though the *+*
operator comes first in the expression. 

Exercise: How many ternary Boolean operations are there? Hint: for an
operator with *n* Boolean arguments there are :math:`2^n` combinations
of input values. This means that there will be :math:`2^n` rows in its
truth table, and so :math:`2^n` blanks to fill in with Boolean values
in the right column. How many ways are there to fill in :math:`2^n`
Boolean values? Express your answer in terms of *n*.


Exercise: Write down the truth table for our Boolean if-then-else
operator.

Formal Languages: Syntax and Semantics
======================================

Any introduction to programming will have made it clear that there is
an infinite set of Boolean expressions. For example, in Dafny, *true*
is a Boolean expression; so are *false*, *true || false*, *(true ||
false) && (!false)*, and one could keep going on forever.

Boolean *expressions*, as we see here, are a different kind of thing
than Boolean *values*. There are only two Boolean values, but there is
an infinity of Boolean expressions. The connection is that each such
expression has a corresponding Boolean truth value. For example, the
expression, *(true || false) && (!false)* has the value, *true*.

The set of valid Boolean expressions is defined by the *syntax* of the
Boolean expression language. The sequence of symbols, *(true || false)
&& (!false)*, is a valid expression in the language, for example, but
*)( true false()||) false !&&* is not, just as the sequence of words,
"Mary works long hours" is a valid sentence in the English language,
but "long works hours Mary" isn't.

The syntax of a language defines the set of valid sentences in the
language. The semantics of a language gives a meaning to each valid
sentence in the language. In the case of Boolean expressions, the
meaning given to each valid "sentence" (expression) is simply the
Boolean value that that expression *reduces to*.

In the rest of this chapter, we use the case of Boolean expressions to
introduce the concepts of the *syntax* and the *semantics* of *formal
languages*. The syntax of a formal language precisely defines a set of
*expressions* (sometimes called sentences or formulae). A *semantics*
associates a *meaning*, in the form of a *value*, with each expression
in the language.

The Syntax of Boolean Expressions: Inductive Definitions
========================================================

As an example of syntax, the *true*, in the statement, *var b :=
true;* is a valid expression in the language of Boolean expressions,
as defined by the *syntaxt* of this language. The semantics of the
language associates the Boolean *value*, *true*, with this expression.

You probably just noticed that we used the same symbol, *true*, for
both an expression and a value, blurring the distinction between
expressions and values. Expressions that directly represent values are
called *literal expressions*. Many languages use the usual name for a
value as a literal expression, and the semantics of the language then
associate each such expression with its corresponding value.

In the semantics of practical formal languages, literal expressions
are assigned the values that they name. So the *expression*, *true*,
means the *value*, *true*, for example. Similarly, when *3* appears on
the right side of an assignment/update statement, such as in *x := 3*,
it is an *expression*, a literal expression, that when *evaluated* is
taken to *mean* the natural number (that we usually represent as) *3*.

As computer scientists interested in languages and meaning, we can
make these concepts of syntax and semantics not only precisely clear
but also *runnable*. So let's get started.

The Syntax and Semantics of *Simplified* Boolean Expression Language
--------------------------------------------------------------------

We start by considering a simplified language of Boolean expressions:
one with only two literal expressions.  To make it clear that they are
not Boolean values but expressions, we will call them not *true* and
*false* but *bTrue* and *bFalse*.

Syntax
^^^^^^

We can represent the syntax of this language in Dafny using what we
call an *inductive data type definition.* A data type defines a set of
values. So what we need to define is a data type whose values are all
and only the valid expressions in the language. The data type defines
the *syntax* of the language.

In the current case, we need a type with only two values, each one of
them representing a valid expression in our language. Here's how we'd
write it in Dafny. 

.. code-block:: dafny

   datatype Bexp =
	bTrue |
	bFalse

The definition starts with the *datatype* keyword, followed by the
name of the type being defined (*Bexp*, short for Boolean expression)
then an equals sign, and finally a list of *constructors* separated by
vertical bar characters. The constructors define the ways in which the
values of the type (or *terms*) can be created. Each constructor has a
and can take optional parameters. Here the names are *bTrue* and
*bFalse* and neither takes any parameters.

The only values of an inductive type are those that can be built using
the provided constructors. So the language that we have specified thus
far has only two values, which we take to be the valid expressions in
the language we are specifying, namely *bTrue* and *bFalse*.  That is
all there is to specifying the *syntax* of our simplified language of
Boolean expressions.

Semantics
^^^^^^^^^
To give a preview of what is coming, we now specify a semantics for
this language. Speaking informally, we want to associate, to each of
the expressions, a correponding meaning in the form of a Boolean
value.  We do this by defining a *function* that takes an expression
(a value of type *bExp*) as an argument and that returns the Boolean
*value* that the semantics defines as the meaning of that expression.
Here, we want a function that returns Dafny's Boolean value *true* for
the expression, *bTrue*, and the Boolean value *false* for *bFalse*.

Here's how we can write this function in Dafny.  

.. code-block:: dafny

   function method bEval(e: bExp): bool 
   {
     match e
     {
         case bTrue => true
         case bFalse => false
     }
   }
		
As a shorhand for *Boolean semantic evaluator* we call it *bEval*. It
takes an expression (a value of type, *bExp*) and returns a Boolean
value.  The function implementation uses an important construct that
is probably new to most readers: a *match* expression. What a match
expression does is to: first determine how a value of an inductive
type was buit, namely what constructor was used and what arguments
were provided (if any) and then to compute a result for the case at
hand.

The match expression starts with the match keyword followed by the
variable naming the value being matched. Then within curly braces
there is a *case* for each constructor for the type of that value.
There are two constructors for the type, *bExp*, so there are two
cases. Each case starts with the *case* keyword, then the name of a
constructor followed by an argument list if the construtor took
parameters. Neither constructor took any parameters, so there is no
need to deal with parameters here. The left side thus determines how
the value was constructed. Each case has an arrow, *=>*, that is
followed by an expression that when evaluated yields the result *for
that case*.

The code here can thus be read as saying, first look at the given
expression, then determine if it was *bTrue* or *bFalse*. In the first
case, return *true*. In the second case, return *false*. That is all
there is to defining a semantics for this simple language.

The Syntax of a Complete Boolean Expression Language
----------------------------------------------------

The real language of Boolean expressions has many more than two valid
expressions, of course. In Dafny's Boolean expression sub-language,
for example, one can write not only the literal expressions, *true*
and *false*, but also expressions such as *(true || false) && (not
false)*.

There is an infinity of such expressions, because given any one or two
valid expressions (starting with *true* and *false*) we can always
build a bigger expression by combing the two given ones with a Boolean
operator. No matter how complex expressions *P* and *Q* are, we can,
for example, always form the even more complex expressions, *!P*, *P
&& Q*, and *P || Q*, among others.

How can we extend the syntax of our simplified language so that it
specifies the infinity set of well formed expressions in the language
of Boolean expressions? The answer is that we need to add some more
cosntructors. In particular, for each Boolean operator (including
*and, or*, and *not*), we need a a constructor that takes the right
number of smaller expressions as arguments and the builds the right
larger expression.

For example, if *P* and *Q* are arbitrary "smaller" expressions, we
need a consructor to build the expression *P and Q*, a constructor to
build the expression, *P or Q*, and one that can build the expressions
*not P* and *not Q*. Here then is the induction: some constructors of
the *bExp* type will take values of the very type we're defining as
parameters. And because we've defined some values as constants, we
have some expressions to get started with. Here's how we'd write the
code in Dafny.

.. code-block:: dafny

   datatype bExp = 
        bTrue |
        bFalse | 
        bNot (e: bExp) |
        bAnd (e1: bExp, e2: bExp) |
        bOr (e1: bExp, e2: bExp)

We've added three new constructors: one corresponding to each of the
*operator* in Boolean algebra (to keep things simple, we're dealing
with only three of them here). We have named each constructor in a way
that makes the connection to the corresponding operator clear.

We also see that these new constructors take parameters. The *bNot*
constructor takes a "smaller" expression, *e*, and builds/returns the
expression, *bNot e*, which we will interpret as *not e*, or, as we'd
write it in Dafny, *!e*. Similarly, given expressions, *e1* and *e2*,
the *bAnd* and *bOr* operators construct the expressions *bAnd(e1,e2)*
and *bOr(e1,e2)*, respectively, representing *e1 and e2* and *e1 or
e2*, respectively, or, in Dafny syntax, *e1 && e2* and *e1 || e2*.

An expression in our *bExp* language for the Dafny expression *(true
|| false) and (not false))* would be written as *bAnd( (bOr (bTrue,
bFalse)), (bNot bFalse))*. Writing complex expressions like this in
a single line of code can get awkward, to we could also structure the
code like this:

.. code-block:: dafny

   var T: bExp := bTrue;
   var F:      := bFalse;
   var P:      := bOr ( T,  F );
   var Q       := bNot ( F );
   var R       := bAnd ( P, Q );


The Semantics of Boolean Expressions: Recursive Evaluation
==========================================================

The remaining question, then, is how to give meanings to each of the
expressions in the infinite set of expressions that can be built by
finite numbers of applications of the constructor of our extended
*bExp* type? When we had only two values in the type, it was easy to
write a function that returned the right meaning-value for each of the
two cases. We can't possibly write a separate case, though, for each
of an infinite number of expressions. The solution lies again in the
realm of recursive functions.

Such a function will simply do mechanically what you the reader would
do if presented with a complex Boolean expression to evaluate.  You
first figure out what operator was applied to what smaller expression
or expressions. You then evaluate those expressions to get values for
them. And finally you apply the Boolean operator to those values to
get a result.

Take the expression, *(true || false) and (not false))*, which in our
language is expressed by the term, *bAnd( (bOr (bTrue, bFalse)), (bNot
bFalse))*. First we identify the *constructor* that was used to build
the expression In this case it's the constructor corresponding to the
*and* operator: *&&* in the Dafny expression and the *bAnd* in our own
expression language. What we then do depends on what case has occured.

In the case at hand, we are looking at the constructor for the *and*
operator. It took two smaller expressions as arguments. To enable the
precise expression of the return result, ew given temporary names to
the argument values that were passed to the constructor. We can call
them *e1* and *e2*, for example. 
sub-expressions that the operator was applied to.

In this case, *e1* would be *(true || false)* and *e2* would be *(not
false)*. To compute the value of the whole expression, we then obtain
Boolean values for each of *e1* and *e2* and then combine them using
the Boolean *and* operator.

The secret is that we get the values for *e1* and *e2* by the very
same means: recursively! Within the evaluation of the overall Boolean
expression, we thus recursively evaluate the subexpressions. Let's
work through the recursive evaluation of *e1*. It was built using the
*bOr* constructor. That constructor took two arguments, and they were,
in this instance, the literal expressions, *bTrue* and *bFalse*. To
obtain an overall result, we recursively evaluate each of these
expressions and then combine the result using the Boolean *or*
operator. Let's look at the recursive evaluation of the *bTrue*
expression. It just evaluates to the Boolean value, *true* with no
further recursion, so we're done with that. The *bFalse* evaluates to
*false*. These two values are then combined using *or* resulting in
a value of *true* for *eq*. A similarly recursive process produces
the value, *true*, for *e2*. (Reason through the details yourself!)
And finally the two Boolean values, *true* and *true* are combined
using Boolean *and*, and a value for the overall expression is thus
computed and returned.

Here's the Dafny code.

.. code-block:: dafny

    function method bEval(e: bExp): (r: bool) 
    {
        match e 
        {
            case bTrue => true
            case bFase => false
            case bNot(e: bExp) => !bEval(e)
            case bAnd(e1, e2) => bEval(e1) && bEval(e2)
            case bOrEe1, e2) =>  bEval(e1) || bEval(e2)
        }
    }    

This code extends our simpler example by adding three cases, one for
each of the new constructor. These constructors took smaller
expression values as arguments, so the corresponding cases have used
parameter lists to temporarily give names (*e1*, *e2*, etc.) to the
arguments that were given when the constructor was orginally used.
These names are then used to write the expressions on the right sides
of the arrows, to compute the final results.

These result-computing expressions use recursive evalation of the
constitute subexpressions to obtain their meanings (actual Boolean
values in Dafny) which they then combine using actual Dafny Boolean
operators to produce final results.

The meaning (Boolean value) of any of the infinite number of Boolean
expressions in the Boolean expression language defined by our syntax
(or *grammar*) can be found by a simple application of our *bEval*
function. To compute the value of *R*, above, for example, we just run
*bEval(R)*. For this *R*, this function will without any doubt return
the intended result, *true*.

The Syntax and Semantics of Programming Languages
=================================================

Syntax defines legal expressions. Semantics give each legal expression
an associated meaning. The meanings of Boolean expressions are Boolean
values. Using exactly the same ideas used here for Boolean expressions
we could not only specify but compute with the syntax semantics of a
language of arithmetic expressions.

Indeed, the same ideas apply to programming language. A programming
language has a syntax. It defines the set of valid "programs" in that
language. A programming language also has a semantics, It specifies
what each such program means. However, th meaning of a program is not
captured in a single value. Rather, it is expressed ina relation that
explains how running the programs transforms any pre-execution state
that satisfies the program preconditions into a post-execution state.



